From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Paper (disambiguation).

Paper products: Book, toilet paper, Ruled paper, carton, egg box
Paper
Paper (Chinese characters).svg
"Paper" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters
[show]Transcriptions
Paper is a thin material produced by pressing together moist fibres of cellulose pulp derived from wood, rags or grasses, and drying them into flexible sheets. It is a versatile material with many uses, including writing, printing, packaging, cleaning, and a number of industrial and construction processes.

The pulp papermaking process is said to have been developed in China during the early 2nd century CE, possibly as early as the year 105 CE,[1] by the Han court eunuch Cai Lun, although the earliest archaeological fragments of paper derive from the 2nd century BCE in China.[2] The modern pulp and paper industry is global, with China leading its production and the United States right behind it.

Contents  [hide] 
1	History
2	Early sources of fibre
3	Etymology
4	Papermaking
4.1	Chemical pulping
4.2	Mechanical pulping
4.3	De-inked pulp
4.4	Additives
4.5	Producing paper
4.6	Finishing
4.6.1	Paper grain
5	Applications
6	Types, thickness and weight
7	Paper stability
8	Environmental impact
9	Future
10	See also
11	Notes
12	References
13	Further reading
14	External links
History
Main article: History of paper

Hemp wrapping paper, China, circa 100 BC.
The oldest known archaeological fragments of the immediate precursor to modern paper, date to the 2nd century BCE in China. The pulp papermaking process is ascribed to Cai Lun, a 2nd-century CE Han court eunuch.[2]

Its knowledge and uses spread from China through the Middle East to medieval Europe in the 13th century, where the first water powered paper mills were built.[3] Because of paper's introduction to the West through the city of Baghdad, it was first called bagdatikos.[4] In the 19th century, industrialization greatly reduced the cost of manufacturing paper. In 1844, the Canadian inventor Charles Fenerty and the German F. G. Keller independently developed processes for pulping wood fibres.[5]

Early sources of fibre

Ancient Sanskrit on Hemp based Paper. Hemp Fibre was commonly used in the production of paper from 200 BCE to the Late 1800's.
See also: wood pulp and deinking
Before the industrialisation of the paper production the most common fibre source was recycled fibres from used textiles, called rags. The rags were from hemp, linen and cotton.[6] A process for removing printing inks from recycled paper was invented by German jurist Justus Claproth in 1774.[6] Today this method is called deinking. It was not until the introduction of wood pulp in 1843 that paper production was not dependent on recycled materials from ragpickers.[6]

Etymology
Further information: Papyrus
The word "paper" is etymologically derived from Latin papyrus, which comes from the Greek πάπυρος (papuros), the word for the Cyperus papyrus plant.[7][8] Papyrus is a thick, paper-like material produced from the pith of the Cyperus papyrus plant, which was used in ancient Egypt and other Mediterranean cultures for writing before the introduction of paper into the Middle East and Europe.[9] Although the word paper is etymologically derived from papyrus, the two are produced very differently and the development of the first is distinct from the development of the second. Papyrus is a lamination of natural plant fibres, while paper is manufactured from fibres whose properties have been changed by maceration.[2]
